---
published: true
layout: feature
title: Summer of 2014
image: summer-2014.jpg
excerpt: "While many are lamenting his summer's record-setting drop in profits, we assess the quality of its blockbusters rather than the quantity of cash dollars they raked in."
date: 2014-08-21 17:17
author: jaredy
addressee: Summer of 2014
categories:
  - essays
  - features
comments: true
tags: [2014, awards, Best, blockbuster, Essays, summer]
---

Just a few weeks, now, until the kids are once again back at school and the temperature begins its creeping descent. Talk will soon turn to awards season and which movies will be lauded or snubbed. The summer always passes too quickly; this summer in particular. Many are lamenting your [record-setting drop in profits][3]. But might it be better to judge your place in history by the quality of your blockbusters rather than the quantity of cash dollars they raked in?

   [3]: http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-summer-still-headed-726096

At first glance, you look the same as the summers that came before. At the top of the heap is yet another critically-derided _Transformers_ movie that is notable only for being ["bigger, harder, faster, and louder than anything that came before it"][4] (and perhaps, too, as a sass-talking robotic straw man for every argument about the moral and artistic decay of big-budget filmmaking). _Transformers: Age of Extinction_ is a modern beast: not just a four-quadrant flick, but one built for an international audience (or more specifically, China). And we all know what happens when you try to please all of the people all of the time, right?

   [4]: /letters/2014/6/27/transformers-age-of-extinction.html

But after that, the list gets interesting.

The end of the superhero blockbuster seems prophesied every season, but you proved that it may be stronger than ever. Particularly for Marvel Studios and its ingenious decades-long strategy. Of your top five highest-grossing flicks, there are _three_ Marvel superhero movies. And two of them are actually good. While _The Amazing Spider-Man 2_ was a ["spatial and narrative mess"][5], and proved - creatively, at least - that the dark and gritty reboot isn't universally accepted, you also gave us _X-Men: Days of Future Past_, which offered ["a fresh sense of what a superhero movie can be"][6] and _Guardians of the Galaxy_ (your biggest surprise hit) which hasn't just smashed box office records, but earned the affection of many critics, thanks to (or maybe despite) ["enough bang-bang zap-zap action to fill whatever quota these films must meet."][7]

   [5]: /letters/2014/4/30/the-amazing-spider-man-2.html
   [6]: /letters/2014/5/30/x-men-days-of-future-past.html
   [7]: /letters/2014/8/1/guardians-of-the-galaxy.html

But what about your more ambitious films? Or, more importantly: were there any ambitious films? It seems in recent years that the summer season is a time to lower one's intellectual expectations. Many complain that Hollywood seems incapable, anymore, of producing the kind of thoughtful adult films that are able to find large audience. Blame the international market, blame changing distribution models, blame the kids with their smartphones and Snapchats and Tinders--but whoever you blame, this lack of aesthetic maturity has been a common complaint for decades. Should we take it as a positive sign, then, that you gave us a film that had ["moral grey areas that make it compelling"][8] and _also_ grossed over $200 Million in the U.S. alone? Or was _Dawn of the Planet of the Apes_ an outlier? Does it merely prove how low our expectations have fallen when it comes to absorbing a little bit of fibrous allegory with our sugary summer diet? 

   [8]: /letters/2014/7/12/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes.html

But all those films are adaptations or sequels or mash-ups of multiple sequels. Even the other top-grosser - Disney's _Maleficent_ - is a rebooted reimagined (and, if nothing else, ["mercifully short"][9]) reinvention of an existing character. Did you give us anything original to ponder over? The relative success of small films like [Obvious Child][10] and [Boyhood][11] are proof that you did (is there a more unlikely summer hit than an experimental art-house flick from one of the most respected indie directors of the era?).

   [9]: /letters/2014/6/4/maleficent.html
   [10]: /letters/2014/7/4/obvious-child.html
   [11]: /letters/2014/8/5/boyhood.html

But the real question I wanted to ask you, Summer of 2014, is why no one is talking about _Snowpiercer_? It's more than just ["a singular effort on a one-way track to thriller-ville"][12]--it's an example of what the summer blockbuster could - and _should _- be: outrageous, inventive, intelligent, affecting. _Guardians of the Galaxy_ is proof of how far a marketing dollar can go to promoting an unknown quantity. I can't help but imagine what you would have been like if the studio that produced Bong Joon-ho's sci-fi thriller hadn't so badly bungled its release. Maybe then, despite your precipitous drop in ticket sales, we could be calling you the best summer in memory.

   [12]: /letters/2014/7/3/snowpiercer.html