---
layout: feature
published: true
image: will-a-female-comedian-ever-be-a-movie-star.jpg
title: "Will a Female Comedian Ever Be a Movie Star?"
addressee: Comedy Lovers
excerpt: "Christopher Redmond wonders who, if anyone, will break into the boys club of comedy movie stardom."
author: christopherr
comments: true
categories:
  - features
  - essays
tags: [comdey,actors,Kristin Wiig,Melissa McCarthy]
---

Sometime around the year 2000, I had a sad epiphany. While talking movies with some friends, I realized there was no female equivalent to the big comedy stars of the day: Jim Carrey, Mike Myers, Adam Sandler, Eddie Murphy, etc. The only counterexample we could think of was Cameron Diaz. But other than _There’s Something About Mary,_ there wasn’t much to base that argument on.

At the time, I had no answer as to why a woman hadn’t broken through with the same success as so many men. But I figured it was only a matter of time. A new century was upon us, after all.

Fast forward to last weekend: another epiphany. 

There are currently three sitcoms  in my weekly must-watch TV schedule: _Girls_, _Broad City_, and _The Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt_. Three shows that don’t just feature female leads, but each boast deep rosters of hilarious female characters and creators. And this is on top of other shows chalk full of great female leads like _Veep_, _The Mindy Project_, _Parks and Rec,_ and easily a dozen others.  

But then I tried to think of equivalent female _movie_ stars. Women who are performing in comedy films with the same success as their small-screen counterparts. Needless to say, I couldn’t.

What gives? Why is it that television has long been, and is now (perhaps more than ever) filled with funny female actors and rich characters, while female film stars are always one-and-done when it comes to big comedy successes? 

My first instinct is to blame Kristen Wiig. Who can forget the fervor that surrounded _Bridesmaids_, and the countless think-pieces that heralded the coming of an exciting new world of female-driven comedies? The film’s wild crossover success (evidenced, for me, by the fact my 81-year-old grandma also loved the film) resulted in a critical and financial bonanza, including two Academy Award nominations (Best Original Screenplay for Wiig and Annie Mumolo, and a Supporting Actress nod for Melissa McCarthy). But Wiig seemingly took all that goodwill and burned it with a string of low-energy indie films (_Girl Most Likely_, _Hateship Loveship,_ [_Friends With Kids_](http://www.dearcastandcrew.com/content/2012/3/30/friends-with-kids.html)_, The Skeleton Twins_). Maybe it was a conscious reaction to the pressure, but, so far, it certainly feels like a squandered opportunity. 

In the four years since _Bridesmaids_, I don’t feel like we’re much further ahead. There are exceptions, of course. _The Heat_ made almost as much money as _Bridesmaids,_ and co-starred McCarthy, who has made a valiant effort to be crowned the queen of comedy. Her crude clowning can kick ass, but her big test at solo stardom was [_Tammy_](http://www.dearcastandcrew.com/content/2014/7/24/tammy.html), which failed to generate significant business (or laughs). Her co-star, Sandra Bullock, also bucked the one-off comedy curse (_Miss Congeniality_’s lackluster sequel, notwithstanding), but no one will ever consider the Academy Award-winner a comedy-first movie star. Same goes for Reese Witherspoon, Barbara Streisand, and Diane Keaton.  

Wiig still seems to be the Great White Hope for female comedy superstardom. Her campaign got a serious boostthis January when she was announced as one of the leads in the upcoming, all-female [_Ghostbusters_](http://www.dearcastandcrew.com/content/2014/8/22/ghosts-of-ghostbusters.html) reboot (along with McCarthy, Kate McKinnon, and Leslie Jones). But any excitement generated by that bold decision was quickly deflated by the seemingly knee-jerk follow-up announcement telling us not to worry because, of course, there will  be an all-male _Ghostbusters_ remake as well. 

Oh, I’m so relieved. 

Who’s to blame here? Is it the writers who can’t generate funny female-driven scripts? Is it the studios? Can they really be _that_ entrenched in sexism when audience demand is so obvious? From _Clueless_ to _Mean Girls_ to [_Pitch Perfect_](http://www.dearcastandcrew.com/content/2012/10/3/pitch-perfect.html), people buy tickets when something good is in theaters. And the talent pool for funny female performers has never been deeper: Emma Stone, Aubrey Plaza, Zooey Deschanel, Amy Schumer, Rose Byrne, Kat Dennings—all of them are talented enough toone day wear the crown. Even Rebel Wilson has a shot (even if she's destined to always be the Josh Gad to McCarthy’s Jonah Hill). Then there’s Sarah Silverman, Tina Fey, Amy Poehler, Queen Latifa, Leslie Mann, Elizabeth Banks, and Jennifer Aniston, all of whom are proven comedic talents, but seem to have only a fleeting interest at headlining rom-less coms. Or maybe they’ve just never had the right chance?

All I know is that we need more of what we’re seeing on TV every single week. It’s not hard for women to be funny. Or for them to be movie stars. So why can’t they be both?