---
layout: feature
published: false
date: 2016-03-01 16:30:00:00
image: the-black-mark-of-the-2016-oscars.jpg
title: "The Black Mark of the 2016 Oscars"
excerpt: "The 88th Academy Awards will go down in history for bluntly and relentlessly addressing the #OscarSoWhite issue. But did Chris Rock help or hurt the cause?"
essay_subject: false
author: christopherr
addressee: "Future Black Acting Nominees"
comments: true
categories:
  - features
  - essays
tags: [Oscars, Academy Awards, controversy, racism, Chris Rock]
---
I feel for you. I really do. Not because you may or may not have been overlooked in the past couple of years by the Academy Awards, but because of how intensely you’ll be looked at next year. No matter how worthy your performance, make no mistake:will be on the receiving end of affirmative action. Whether that's real or perceived, doesn't matter. Your place in history will be tainted by the context of the 2016 ceremony.

The 88th Annual Academy Awards were completely hijacked by a single issue. Chris Rock didn't just address the elephant in the room, he forced it into a perverse circus, abusing the animal until an undignified death. He was so relentless as ringleader that it will probably end up being detrimental to the real goal. 

But first of all, was he funny? Frequently. Rock had plenty of well-crafted jokes about race and a signature pleasantly-angry delivery that was pretty much the ideal vehicle for the message. But every chance he had to advance the conversation was a detour right back on the same subject. For three and a half hours. At one point he almost managed to diverge from his manifesto – pointing out the progress and luxury of Black people even caring about Academy Award nominations. But even that elegant point wasn't enough for him to pivot into new territory. Instead, every punchline, save maybe one about a lime green suit, was racialized. Even the Girl Guides gag was built on the back of white guilt. Focusing so exclusively on race may have been the easy – and even necessary – target, but I can't help but think there will be unintended consequences.

When Black actors have won in the past, or even nominated, it has felt earned. The world was swept away with Lupita N'yongo. Barkhad Abdi stole the show on screen and off, with his story of rags to (temporary) riches. Everyone can tell Chiwetel Ejiofor is going to be a star, and are relieved at the surprising ease of pronouncing his name. We were all charmed to bits by 8-year-old Quvenzhané Wallis. Gabourey Sidibe was a breath of fresh air. This, and more, is all just in the past few years. And then there are the more famous wins by Halle Berry, Jamie Foxx, Forrest Whitaker, Jennifer Hudson, etc. They weren't always the biggest stars at the time, but they still managed to be front runner winners based on some semblance of consensus merit. It will be years before another black actor has that same luxury.

I think the #OscarsSoWhite hashtag and conversation originally came from a good place. The Academy Awards are a high profile event, and are seen as an opportunity to bring light to lesser-seen films and performances. Bu by the time President of the Academy Cheryl Boone Isaacs was pleading for members to vote differently, the question of personal taste has been officially usurped by a new professional responsibility. Rather than a forum for discussion, the Academy Academy has now been held hostage by #OscarsSoWhite, and no one will win as a result. 

Here's the worst part. It will happen again. There will be another year with no black nominees. Statistically, it's almost unavoidable. So then what happens? Where can the protest honestly go from here? It's horribly unpopular to point out that black actors have been statistically over-represented in acting categories since 2000 - even after the back-to-back years of no nominees - but [it's also true](http://www.economist.com/blogs/prospero/2016/01/film-and-race). To make a horribly white comparison, it's like how Canada received foreign language film nominations three years in a row (2010-2012) and since then, nothing. And this is _after_ we’ve unleashed Xavier Dolan on the world. It's easy for us industry Canucks to get squirrelly and fret over that dire state of our films, but it's also just part of the ebb and flow of artistic achievement. Not even perennial cinema pros like France can get consistent nominations. Again, these are not an apples-to-apples comparisons, but no one can expect a permanent seat for nominations - this isn't the UN Security Council. 

It’s sad to say, but Rock may have been on to something when he joked about needing a black category. It usually takes an egregious error for the Academy to change their ways, like the way Best Make-Up didn’t come until the year after _The Elephant Man_ (1981), or foreign language rules were changed after the Italian film _Private_ (2004) was disqualified for not being in the country’s official language, or even the new expanded Best Picture category, which was a direct reaction to _The Dark Knight_ (2008) not being voted in. Other than actually creating a separate category, how on earth to you guarantee “diverse” nominees without mandating it? Canada did it with Cabinet Ministers in 2015 – but should award ceremonies really be held to the same standard as governments? 

Speaking of which, nobody seems to be talking about the unprecedented achievements of Latino Americans over the past several years. Alphonso Cuaron winning Best Director, back-to-back directing wins by Alejandro G. Iñárritu, three wins in a row by Emmanuel Lubezki for Best Cinematographer – three!! – which just happen to come after Chilean cinematographer Claudia Miranda’s win for _Life of Pi_. Even N’yongo is Mexican-born. If there was any semblance of equality in the U.S., this Latin wave would be the headlines on every newspaper. 

Let's also be clear. There were no obvious “black” snubs this year. _Creed_ and _Straight Outta_ _Compton_were the better than expected films, not exceptional films. Sylvester Stallone probably didn't deserve a nomination for his performance either – but it was an accumulation of respect and acknowledgement for a franchise that has had an enormous effect on American pop culture over 40 years. To compare apples to apples, Nick Nolte was for more deserving of his supporting performance in _Warrior_ a few years ago, but that film (which is just as good as _Creed_), was quietly left relegated to its “better than expected” status. Snubbed? Hardly. At least _Selma_ felt like a contender, but even that film’s non-nominations felt more like [missed opportunities](http://www.dearcastandcrew.com/content/2015/1/26/is-it-oscarssowhite-or-just-oscarssowrong.html), which can be counted by the dozen across the board each year.  

It might not feel like progress to have no black nominees, but it is an inevitable part of the process. It's okay that the young Q. Wallis got a nomination for _Beasts of the Southern Wild_ a few years ago, but Jacob Tremblay didn't this year for _Room_. Kids don't have birthrights to nominations, either. No one does. And no one needs an #OscarsSoOld campaign, though I'm sure that's coming.

So let’s take a quick look into the future, because we have to (films don’t exactly pop up overnight). Academy members, you can be sure, are already penciling in _The Birth of a Nation_ on the ballot. After premiering at Sundance last month, Nate Parker’s self-directed performance of the Nat Taylor slave rebellion already carries the weight of being the Great Black Hope. Months before seeing the film, every Oscar voter is suddenly challenged to vote for or, by default, _against_ that film. Because living through another three and a half hour televised lecture is not on anyone’s to-do list. The question is, will the film be deserving, or just good enough to fill a hole?

Unfortunately for that film, and any number of other probably deserving films with black actors and filmmakers, we’ll never actually know. It’s a feel good story when an individual is overdue for an acting win or nomination. It’s something else completely when that pressure gets broadly applied to an entire community of people.